README.md, before:


<img width="2155" height="1363" alt="Zrzut ekranu 2026-01-06 125154" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3aea5291-1413-4f53-9152-81f60eef12d7" />

## Restaurant POS - Backend API

The RESTful API engine for the Restaurant Point of Sale system. Built with Node.js and Express, it handles business logic, database persistence, and secure third-party integrations.

## 🚀 Live Environment
- **Connected Frontend:** [https://restaurant.rafalsprengel.com/](https://restaurant.rafalsprengel.com/)

## 🔑 Core Functionalities
- **User Registration & Authentication** – Support for registering new users, logging in, and managing sessions using Passport.js with JWT. Supports multiple roles such as client, staff, and administrator.  
- **Secure Authentication**: Implementation of Passport.js with JWT strategies for stateless user sessions.
- **Payment Processing** – Stripe API integration, including webhook handling for secure, server-side transactions.
- **Product & Category Management** – Full CRUD operations for menu products and categories.
- **Order Management** – Create, update, and track orders, including user-specific order history.
- **Table Reservation System** – Check table availability, create and manage reservations, validate dates and times, prevent overlapping bookings.
- **Messaging System** – Receive and store messages from frontend contact forms, send replies, track read/unread status, and optionally notify via SMTP email.
- **Role-Based Access**: Middleware-driven protection for administrative routes and resources.
- **Error Tracking**: Custom middleware system that logs server errors to local files for production monitoring.
- **CORS & Security**: Configured for secure communication with the frontend application.

## 🛠 Tech Stack
- **Runtime**: Node.js
- **Framework**: Express.js
- **Database**: MongoDB & Mongoose (ODM)
- **Security**: Passport.js, JWT (JSON Web Tokens), Bcrypt (password hashing)
- **Payments**: Stripe SDK
- **Messaging:** Nodemailer 
- **Utilities**: Dotenv (environment management), Morgan (HTTP request logging)

## 📁 Project Structure
- `models/`: Mongoose schemas (User.js, Order.js, Product.js).
- `routes/`: Express router definitions for Auth, Products, and Payments.
- `middleware/`: Custom functions for auth validation and error logging.
- `logs/`: Directory for server-generated error log files.
- `server.js`: Main entry point and server configuration.

## 🚀 Setup & Installation
1. Clone the repository: `git clone https://github.com/RafalSprengel/restaurant-pos-backend`
2. Install dependencies: `npm install`
3. Configure environment: Create a `.env` file with the following keys:
   (Detailed example variables are provided in the .env.example file)
4. Start server: `npm start` (or `npm run dev` for development)

## 🔄 Status
This repository serves as the centralized backend service. It is architected to be consumed by the React-based frontend, ensuring a clear separation of concerns.

Commit message:

Clarify user registration and authentication features
Updated user registration and authentication details to specify different user types and role-based access.

README.md, after:


<img width="2155" height="1363" alt="Zrzut ekranu 2026-01-06 125154" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3aea5291-1413-4f53-9152-81f60eef12d7" />

## Restaurant POS - Backend API

The RESTful API engine for the Restaurant Point of Sale system. Built with Node.js and Express, it handles business logic, database persistence, and secure third-party integrations.

## 🚀 Live Environment
- **Connected Frontend:** [https://restaurant.rafalsprengel.com/](https://restaurant.rafalsprengel.com/)

## 🔑 Core Functionalities
- **User Registration & Authentication** – Support for registering new users of different types (Customer, Member, Moderator, Administrator), logging in, and managing sessions using Passport.js with JWT. Role-based access determines which data and operations each user can perform. 
- **Secure Authentication**: Implementation of Passport.js with JWT strategies for stateless user sessions.
- **Payment Processing** – Stripe API integration, including webhook handling for secure, server-side transactions.
- **Product & Category Management** – Full CRUD operations for menu products and categories.
- **Order Management** – Create, update, and track orders, including user-specific order history.
- **Table Reservation System** – Check table availability, create and manage reservations, validate dates and times, prevent overlapping bookings.
- **Messaging System** – Receive and store messages from frontend contact forms, send replies, track read/unread status, and optionally notify via SMTP email.
- **Role-Based Access**: Middleware-driven protection for administrative routes and resources.
- **Error Tracking**: Custom middleware system that logs server errors to local files for production monitoring.
- **CORS & Security**: Configured for secure communication with the frontend application.

## 🛠 Tech Stack
- **Runtime**: Node.js
- **Framework**: Express.js
- **Database**: MongoDB & Mongoose (ODM)
- **Security**: Passport.js, JWT (JSON Web Tokens), Bcrypt (password hashing)
- **Payments**: Stripe SDK
- **Messaging:** Nodemailer 
- **Utilities**: Dotenv (environment management), Morgan (HTTP request logging)

## 📁 Project Structure
- `models/`: Mongoose schemas (User.js, Order.js, Product.js).
- `routes/`: Express router definitions for Auth, Products, and Payments.
- `middleware/`: Custom functions for auth validation and error logging.
- `logs/`: Directory for server-generated error log files.
- `server.js`: Main entry point and server configuration.

## 🚀 Setup & Installation
1. Clone the repository: `git clone https://github.com/RafalSprengel/restaurant-pos-backend`
2. Install dependencies: `npm install`
3. Configure environment: Create a `.env` file with the following keys:
   (Detailed example variables are provided in the .env.example file)
4. Start server: `npm start` (or `npm run dev` for development)

## 🔄 Status
This repository serves as the centralized backend service. It is architected to be consumed by the React-based frontend, ensuring a clear separation of concerns.
